The Tuti-namah, or “Tales of a Parrot,” was one of the first manuscripts commissioned by the famous
Mughal Emperor of the 16th century, Akbar. Influenced by Indian, Persian and Islamic styles, these illustrations
depict the stories told by a parrot to a woman named Khojisteh, who needed to be kept
distracted from visiting a handsome, foreign prince and betraying her travelling husband, Meimun.
One night as Khojisteh went to leave to meet her lover, she saw the parrot sitting pensively. Curious as to
what he was thinking, Khojisteh asked the parrot what was on his mind. The parrot explained to her that
he hopes she gets the chance to visit her lover before her husband returns and it’s too late.
The parrot continued on to say that he does not want her to regret missing out on meeting the prince, like
“the cat, who, after the death of the mice, repented.” Khojisteh, curious as to how a cat could repent
killing mice, wanted to hear more about this story from the parrot. The parrot began to tell the story
of an old, weary lion. The lion is depicted as a tiger in the illustration due to the interchangeability
of the Hindu word “shir”, which is used for big cat animals. This lion was so old that his teeth were
rotten, and when he ate meat, it would stick in between his teeth. Every night, while the lion was
sleeping, mice would appear and pick at the lion’s teeth to get the leftover scraps of meat, disturbing
him from his sound sleep. After many frustrating nights, the lion asked his companions for advice on
what to do about these disturbing mice. A fox came forward, and stated he had a grand idea for the lion.
Intrigued and weakened by age and fatigue, the lion laid patiently with his eyes widened, listening to
the fox’s advice. He suggested that the lion should order the cat to keep watch over him at night to
scare off the mice. Fortunately, this worked great for the lion and the cat; the lion was no longer
disturbed by the mice and the cat was repaid with a good wage and a comfortable home. The cat, smart as
she was, knew to only scare off the mice, not to kill them. If she were to kill all the mice, the lion
would no longer have use for her services, leaving her jobless and homeless. One day, the cat brought
her strong kitten to work to protect the old, withering lion as she wished to leave town for business.
When the mice came out that night, the large kitten quickly pounced and, like a scene from a horror
movie, massacred all the mice in one swift, calculated movement. Arriving upon the massacre, the cat was
furious at her kitten, “What have you done? Why have you killed all the mice?!” The kitten responded,
“Why did not you speak to me at the time of your departure, and forbid me to kill the mice?” In the end,
both the cat and kitten repented. The lion excused the cat from her services, leaving her and her kitten
with no money and no home. Upon finishing the story, the parrot admitted to Khojisteh that she appears
very backward to him, since every day she delays her visit to her lover, while the parrot is afraid her
husband should return and she would repent not going to meet him, like the cat. He tells her this story
in order to stay alive and to make her believe that she will regret not visiting her lover, when in
reality the parrot is trying to delay her from breaking her vows with her husband. Convinced by the
parrot to go visit her lover, Khojisteh turned to leave, when she caught sight of daylight, and once
again, “deferred” her visit.